From hanselminutes.com. It's Hanselman. It's
all weekly discussion with web
developer and technologists. Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number three 11 recorded live
Thursday, March 22nd, 2012. Support for Hansel
minutes is provided by Tellerik
offering the best and developer
tools and support online@wwwdottelerik.com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
Richard minor, rich and Phillip
Turtleford about using F sharp
and.net projects. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman. This is another
episode of Hansel minutes today.
We've got two people on
the phone. We've got Richard
Meinrad. She's calling in from
New York and we've got Phillip
trial for calling in from
London. How's it going, gentlemen?
How are you a little
bit low today? I've lost
an octave, I think, but
I will survive. It's I've
got the cold. Everyone's got
it right now. So you
guys are both user group
leads of, of F sharp
user groups, and you're doing
F sharp in your, in
your everyday life. You're thinking
about F sharp. I know
Richard, you're an MVP and
Philip, you do games and
you can learn in business
applications. You do a lot
of opensource. I, I still
haven't quite gotten my brain
around why I should care
about, about F sharp. I
mean, Richard, is this, is
this just a researcher's language?
I mean, how did F
sharp come up so fast
and really as a C
sharp developer? Why should I
care? Well, there's a lot
of good reasons to use
F sharp, but I would
say the best reason of
all is maintenance. Because when
you write your code with
a sharp, it really becomes
a much, it provides a
much safer environment in code
because of human ability and
the way the types fit
together. This really means that
one developer, right? I work
primarily by myself and I
can build like a really
big app really fast because
it's so terse. And then
the maintenance is very low
because changes don't necessarily ripple
through the system the same
way they do. And then
I'll be starting to language.
And also the, the type
system is a form of
protection against bugs. Phillip Richard
said immutability. And he, he,
he said it like, it
was a very obvious thing.
What does that mean for
people who may not necessarily
be familiar with that, that
why that is such a
fundamental aspect of F sharp
and why it's such a
useful thing? Well, it means
that instead of changing something
directly, like going and injecting,
coming into the first element
of our array, you might
return something new. Now that
sounds like it might be
really inefficient, but it's not
because of there's fancy data
structures. You don't need to
worry about the hood and
handle most of that. It's
really quite nice. So Phillip,
in, in London, so he's
saying that rather than changing
things and changing the state
of something, you're always returning
something, something new. Yeah. And,
and I've shown it's not
purely functional language, so you
can, I've a COVID mutual.
So not change, create a
new instance, or you can
mutate if performance is, is
what you're after more often
than not for body 80
20 rule, you know, you
know, always in a high
performance area. And you're looking
for correctness that said, I
mean, 12 objects on a
garbage collects environment on that
sheet. I expensive the gobs
collect for the likes tracing
and collecting lots of small
objects. So you get that
correctness and with very little
cost, Phillip doesn't that mean
that I have to fundamentally
change the way I think
about solving a problem that
if I try to go
and simply translate how I
write C-sharp into writing F
sharp, that I won't really
be writing idiomatic F sharp.
I won't be writing F
sharp in the way that
it wants to be written.
Absolutely. I think you're right
though, if it is a
change of the way you
thinking, so you can start
out with an imperative view
with falling Smith, Haitian and
AF shell, but it's more
naturally a functional language. The
types are a mutual by
default. So if you want
to Mark something as being
changeable, you actually science measle.
So you, you want to
move towards a more transformational
mindset. So instead of thinking
about mutating and doing things,
there's a recipe. You think
how I want to go
from high to be, and
how do I, how do
I transform from those two
things? Now that sounds that
that is quite a bit
of a mind set shift,
but in this world where
we're trying to deal with
concurrency and multiple processes, if
we look at problems from
a transformational point of view
where we're not mutating small
state, then we have that
safety and we can actually
run all programs across multi-core
in parallel or concurrently and
things don't go wrong. So
that's going to be actually
that initial thought will cost
you a lot less for
you, and a lot less
problems in, in the multicolor
environment. I just want to
mention that when I learned
at sharp, I had been
at CSR program or for
years, and I had never
done a functional programming language
outside of college before. So
I didn't really know what
I was doing, but it
really is gonna be treated
sort of like a more
Python version of a C-sharp.
And then you can build
your way up and learning
the constructs over time. And
that's sharp has its sort
of feature that it's hard
to describe, but it pushes
you in a direction and
the ability and the ability
to just so much more
convenient, but in using it
over a period of time,
you'll get more and more
immutable and you'll learn more
and more about where you
need to do them, you
patient in order to, and
in a way, and in
order to be like her
foreman. So it's not like
you have to learn all
these features out of the
gate and be able to
write this fancy code. It
really can just be like
a purser version of C
sharp at first. So Phillips
said something really interesting there
that if I start doing
my, my, my functions as
kind of mathematical functions in
that something comes in is
transformed and then comes out
change. And I chain them
together like that. That, that
allows me to do things
over multiple processors. What is
it about F sharp that,
that makes that so friendly
that, that idea of, of
immutability enabling things over multiprocessors
does that mean that changing
state itself makes an application
not, not easy to scale
across more than one processor
Saying stay does it doesn't
necessarily stop here, but it
adding an extra level of
complexity. As soon as you
do that, you, you find
yourself potentially adding a log
or some sort of reading
primitive to protect changes happening.
Now, if you creating new
objects each time, you just
don't have to worry about
that. Now that said that
the classic example of from
a performance level is a
dictionary, would a dictionary. The
performance is just ridiculous, higher
on a meta level, a
dictionary, the standard dose, don't
that one compared to creating
a tree each time. So
there are points where you
should be choosing meta type
structures. And with anything, when
you doing a Pullman's critical
code, you should be guided
by timings rather than sort
of pure conjecture and or
denotation you need, you need,
you need some real values
to know that. So what
you're saying is that there's
nothing in F sharp that
makes me like automatically get
magical powers for free, or
at least not magical multiprocessor
powers, but some of the
powers that I'm, that I
might get, like, like Richard
said, they're, they're much easier
to, to maintain and manage
because things are plugged in.
There's a lot of, a
lot less things changing without
me explicitly knowing about it.
I mean, a lot of
the, kind of the bugs,
or as my friend likes
to say highs and bugs
that we bump into in,
in C-sharp are something changed.
And I don't know why.
And then we ended up
stepping through and wondering how
that, that this static variable
or this, this thing I
wasn't thinking about, or this
property switched values in the
middle of, in the middle
of my work. Do those
kinds of bugs go away
in an F sharp Phillip?
Yeah, absolutely. So this is
been reported quite widely in
the F sharp community idea.
The language kind of guides
you by default, it's a
musical. So by default, you're
guided into not getting so
many concurrency issues with, with
the immutability. We've also got
the pacing workflows feature, which
we'll be seeing in see
shot falling when that comes
along. It's a basically has
some of the features of
F sharp that, so we've
called it great way of
describing asynchronous flows, asynchronous work,
and yeah, we've been using
async and the mutual objects
on the approaching side been
on for the last few
years. And we've had very
few concurrency issues. Mostly we
just press our five and
it works, which is the
happy place. Really just, just
as an aside, we using
a mixture of C sharp
and F sharp. So typically
we'll use C-sharp for the
UI elements cause we've got
the Gregg tool and around
this AML code behind, and
when we want to do
something that's asynchronous and concurrent
or some business transformations, then
we'll, we'll use F shell.
See that, that gets us
into a really interesting place
that I wanted to talk
about. And maybe Richard, you
could say something about this.
How do I know when
a problem is such a
classic F sharp problem? Cause
I think there's a lot
of C-sharp and VB developers
that are listening, and they'd
like to answer, answer the
question, I've got a problem,
and I'm not sure if
this is something that I
could do in 10 lines
of F sharp, as opposed
to a thousand lines of
C sharp. And when I
go and do it, and
if I do use a
F sharp, could it, is
it okay to have a
hybrid like that? Is it
okay to have an application
that's part one language and
part and other, Well, first
off, I certainly like almost
every production in cooperation with
sharp. It's just because he
sharp has amazing UI tooling.
It's like better than anything
out there pretty much. And
then you can just sort
of integrate seamlessly with now.
It's also really good at,
you know, as Phil said,
business parallel, asynchronous, any kind
of complicated algorithm, or even
like, if you have a
pseudo code for an algorithm,
from a book or something,
and you want to turn
it into regular code, it
actually ends up looking a
lot more like the book
and F sharp most of
the time. So there's a
lot of things about a
sharp. Usually whenever the code
is complicated and can go
wrong badly, that's when you
want to reach for at
sharp, because it has offered
so many protections. That's really,
what's great about it is,
you know, there's this sort
of anecdote by the guy
who makes gpu.net. He said,
you know, the thing with
that sharp is once you
make a part of your
code base, you rarely ever
have to go back and
change it because it's so
composable. And also, so like
there's not a lot of
interacting pieces. You just paste
them together in a way
you can't do without writing
actual complicated code in C
sharp. So it really is
great for solving hard problems.
It's so hard to talk
about a quote unquote foreign
languages on a podcast when
you can't really show someone
that, but I keep hearing
more that more and more
that if you, if you
think that you could potentially
get in trouble and you're
going to be writing to
them, it's a very computationally
intensive, very mathematically focused, very,
very functional financial things, transformations
of matrices and things that
you really look at at
F sharp, because there's so
many things that will keep
you from shooting yourself in
the foot. Phillip, do you,
do you have any particular
idea ideas of, of a
classic problem that you just
couldn't think of using anything
but F sharp four? I
think, you know, everything's possible
in FMLA and really what
it comes down to is
time. Right? So one of
the things I've come from
a C sharp background before
that I did C plus
last night, actually, before that
I wrote video games in
assembler thing for me, starting
from C plus last to
see show was a huge
gain in productivity. And again,
with going from seashell sweatshop,
there just the cloth is
a problems that I can
do perhaps in a few
hours that might take me
a day and C sharp.
And I might, this makes
a difference between getting done
or not Donald being voluble
within the timeframe that I
have. So one of my
favorite examples is let's say
domain modeling. So we have
say, we want to describe
the retail domain. We, we,
I have, I have an
example of this that I
do it's hoax, and we're
able to create a domain
and about 10 lines of
code using the F shop
type system. So in the
face, you can model your
domain in a page and
you can actually see, see
the problems, solve them quickly
and move on to new
and more interesting problems. I
think that that's one of
the key elements me. So
the similar class hierarchy in
C sharp would be spread
across eight or nine files,
and that's introducing quite a
lot of accidental complex. Okay.
Phillips. So let's, let's dig
into that a little bit.
I think we can, we
can, we we're, we're hearing
that F sharp is amazing,
and we're hearing that there
are certain things you could
do, and you just brought
up the issue of like
creating a class hierarchy that
where an F sharp, it
could be very terse. If
I were writing something like
that in C-sharp, where is
all of the verbosity? Where
is all of the mess?
Is it, is it, is
it curly braces? Is it
unnecessary keywords? What is it
that is taking up too
much room too much, too
much intellectual noise. Yeah. I
mean, C sharp is a
massive improvement over C plus
class and had a file,
but it's still a lot
of cheap vacation. So I
have like a comedy phrase,
I who the local government
patent, where you doing things
in triplicate to get things
done. So let's say we
have a person class, and
on that class, we have
a night, even a night.
We would potentially describe that
three times over we'll we'll
have some sort of private
property, or, well, sorry, private
field, perhaps we'll, we'll have
a guest, a Cropsey we'll
describe it again and not
even the age in the
constructor. And then as the
parameters to the construction. And
then finally we'll in that
construct who will then say
name equals name and age
equals age. So, w we've
we've filled in a form
in trip, in effect with
our shop, with the, we
can describe that with a
record site. When we say
a person has a name
and an age, and that's
it, it's the single line.
Do you think maybe Richard,
do you think that, that
the kind of thing that
Phillip's describing is, is an
opportunity for C sharp to,
to take things like that
from F sharp, and why
does F sharp shouldn't be
better designed? Or is it,
is it because it came
afterwards that this is like
this, It's more about the
family heritage and about being
able, you just can't take
stuff out of that sharp
and, and throw it into
C sharp easily, because sharp
comes from a different lineage
of languages. It split off
a long time ago. I
know this is sort of
like, sounds like evolution or
something, but it really ends
up being that way. So
just there's certain ideas I
can be sort of plucked
out, but there's features in,
at sharp leg, discriminate unions
are one of the best
examples of one of the
most amazing things and that
sharp. They allow you to
multiple return types of many
function, local input types for
any variable and describe trees
and all kinds of cool
data structures and tiny amount
of code, any like any
place you find yourself using
inheritance hierarchies, you can pretty
much drop in. And this
feature, there's no way for
it to work effectively without
a lot of enhancements of
C sharp. So some things
will make it over and
some of the ideas already
have, but it tends to
be more of like the,
we can add this functionality
of the compiler in terms
of like sync feature. Like
we really think of solving
a problem in F sharp.
Does it really well? Let's
do something like that. And
less like, you know, language
feature about how we treat
data. Those tend to, those
don't tend to make it
over because it's hard. It's
a lot harder. Phillip, you
had a really good example
of something that I don't
think I could do in,
in C sharp when you
were talking about, I think
it was you on your
blog about the game of
life doing it in, in
F sharp. Could you say
something about the game of
life and, and why doing
it Neff sharp was so
terse. Sure. Yeah. So game
of life. So  a
way to learn a new
language. You see, a lot
of people are cutting toe
Jos trying, doing the problem
in a new way, pairing
up with somebody. So I've
gone a little bit further
with that and pushed that
into a tweet into 137
characters. And I'm actually thumb
a bunch of different ways,
but some of the features,
a unique Swift Shaw Hara,
particularly pen matching, you have
a list literally matching. Is
she usually powerful If I
may, who back up for
just a moment to make
sure that not everyone's familiar
with the game, but the
idea is that there's a
grid of cells, right? And
they're either on or off
through they're alive or dead.
And then there's some transitions
based on whether or not
you have a neighbor. So
it's fairly straightforward. Like, it's
very simple in that if
you read the rules, I
think there's about four rules,
and then there's an initial
pattern. And then you simply
let the game run. And
the, the, the grid changes
and the grid could be
expressed as ones and zeros
or dots or visually, it
doesn't really matter, but it
is a, it's a grid.
You set an initial state,
you follow some rules and
you say, go, and it
can be explained to someone
just about that quickly. I
think there's, there's four rules.
Is that correct? Yeah, pretty
much. Yeah. So in effect,
you updating life of a
grid of notes and ones,
and do you update that
life by looking at all
of the notes and ones
that around a particular cell,
I'm counting out the numbers,
and then we apply some
roles to that. And we
say, if the count is
free, regardless of what the
current value is, it becomes
one. If the value of
around the cell is two,
we take the number that
preexisted. So if it was
life before the still life,
if there was no life,
there's no life again. And
the other rule is anything
else means no life. And
actually those in fact, free,
simple rules can make life
appear to happen in front
of you. So it's, it's
a beautiful problem. So, wonderful
thing about pattern matching is
it's kind me like a
switch statement on steroids. So
we would have switched case.
And faceoff when we'd be
able to say in the
case, then we have the
value of three or two,
or, but in, in X
shell, we can say, we
can match against two things
at once like a table.
So we can say, if
it's anything on the count,
it's free and there's life.
If there's a number and
the count is two, then
it goes to that number.
And if there's anything else,
we go to zero, right?
So looking at it now
so that we can explain
the main rules in that
pattern match in about 15
characters, which is ridiculously fast,
but at the same time,
beautifully readable, because we're actually
declaring the algorithm. And, you
know, you look at it,
you go, that's what he
does is this accidental complexity.
Again, See if I'm trying
to, I'm trying to mentally
write this. And I'm seeing
a lot of, a lot
of if statements and already
my C-sharp program is going
to be very, very long.
What is it about F
sharp that, that makes it
so crisp? Is it, is
it because there's just built
in functions and notion of
matching and mapping is fundamental
to the language, Power matching
is it's a huge win.
And it's one of those
features that you see in
most functions in the functional
programming languages, much more rarely.
And so Cece and fax
the imperative style languages. This
is one of the things
in this particular snippet, the
list syntax in an F
shelf in it, again, guy,
most functional languages is you
open a square bracket and
then you just run the
values with a separator. So
you don't have to say
new and square bracket or
a curly brace and, and
ride the values out. You
literally just get the, write
the list as you would
expect to see if you're
reading it in a book
or something. And then F
shops type inference says, Oh,
I see numbers there. So
that must be a list
of numbers. And, you know,
you haven't declared a time.
So that saves you time
and space as well. It
doesn't, it lets you just
fight this on the problems
that you're trying to solve.
And again, removes the accidental
complexity from me. One of
the peaceful things about type
inference and is this sort
of automatic refactoring that you
can get with it. So
instead of having most of
code with declaring types, then
you want to refine it
so you can go in
and edit. And so he,
you some sort of tool
like ReSharper with F Shaw,
if you just changed the
route type in one place
and in first the type
all the way for your
program for you. So that
that reflects definitely even required.
So beautiful gravy, Richard, both
of you guys work with
user groups in the U
S and in the UK,
are these well attended? Are
there a lot of people
doing F sharp and going
to users groups, or is
this just four or five
really smart guys that are
doing this work? Oh, no.
It's really quite big here
in New York city, at least
in that. I'm pretty sure
it's big in London too,
from the pictures I've seen.
I mean, we've had probably
an average of 50, but
when Don came, we had
over a hundred attendees. So
the groups were pretty well
attended and we're seeing a
lot of people and especially
in New York and finance using
it at their companies. So
finance, you mentioned finance, this,
this is, this gets to
what we were talking about
before is that, you know,
very tourist, very clear, very
crisp, but very functional type
problems. I keep, I keep
hearing more and more about
entire libraries being written in
F sharp to support finance
and then having C-sharp call
those lines. Oh, definitely. Yeah.
You filled your UI in
C sharp, and then you
put your complicated finance logic
in the back and an
easy to read. If you
didn't have a domain expert
validate and that's a big
win for everybody involved, What
kind of books do you
or, or websites is there
like a tri F sharp?
The way we think of
like, try Ruby. Like if
I was going to, if
a listener was going to
S you know, get to
get to work on their
commute now and take 15,
20 minutes and learn about
F sharp, what would they
do? How would they spend
that 15, 20 minutes? Absolutely.
Try off shelf to hold.
Yeah. Exists. You're kidding. I
just guessed, so try F
sharp.org to do that right
now. Yeah, you can. If
you've got some silver light,
you can actually run it
in the browser. So if
you're on Mac or PC,
you don't even need to
install visual studio. You can
just go ahead and write
some code, and it's beyond
that. You can actually do
graphical. You can implement graphics
in, in the browser. So
I've actually got a couple
of games that you can
run a snippet, so you
can just load in there
and play with. So there's
a missile command example of
kind of like Tetris that
runs in the browser. And
you can just go and
edit and tweak the variables.
So have quite a lot
of fun. There, there's a
website for snippets called Fs
net. So on that, and
I see hundreds of snippets
being put up that by
the community, just like sure.
Examples of pieces of code
you might find. Interesting little
gangs, all sorts. Really. That's
very interesting. The idea that
of a snippet website, typically
in, in, I know in
C sharp, if you find
code online, it's probably garbage
and you certainly don't want
to be copy pasting and
into your stuff, but in
a world that is more
functional and immutable, it seems
like a snippet would make
a lot more sense. Like
is a snippet Richard much
more useful in F sharp
than it is in C
sharp. Definitely. And I would
say that because that's sharp,
it's so young and early
adopter crowd has written most
of this stuff. It's all
pretty workable. Now. That's not
to say there's not a,
probably 10 different examples of
like commuting a list on
there, but, you know, you
just pick the one that
is most understandable or performance
that's been using the tiny
function and the sharp interactive,
and you can do pretty
well that way. Definitely. It's
not hard. And it's pretty
cool. The best thing about
it that's by far is
actually a neat, neat thing
that partially compiled the snippet
and actually gives you the
types with now it's over
in the browser, which is
wicked. Cool. Wow. Okay. So
Phillip, if I was going
to introduce F sharp into
my organization, but maybe the
bosses or the CTOs are
gonna say, ah, I don't
know, this is some obscure
research language. This is a,
this is built into visual
studio though now, right? So
someone could do this without
fear that it's not that
it's going to go away.
Absolutely. You know, we've had
have shop in visual studio
was a plugin visual studio,
2005. How do you can
see it in the visual
studio 11 now? So it's
not going anywhere, but, and
I had wires going everywhere
in a good way. We've
called it a shelf free
coming in on the basis
of what a really exciting
type providers feature. So, yeah.
Well, tell me a little
bit very briefly in the
end here about F sharp
three, like where's F sharp
heading. And what kind of,
I know that like a
lot of async things have
happened in C-sharp what, what
improvements are being made to
F So the, the real
big ticket item is writers
and time providers is putting
into the language, the ability
to connect to big data,
connect to web services, to
tight spaces, to Excel, to
vinyl, to DSLs, just for
IntelliSense, by pressing doll. So
who, the example I kind
of think of, let's say
we wanted to my shop
and we've got some values
and Excel. We want to
pull some data down from
the world bank. We want
to go some data on
a database. We can do
that free time providers. We
can pull that all in,
and that will give us
tight data through press dot.
We can, we can look
how you've at a time.
We're not going to take
anybody's tables and fields, and
we can join all of
those together. In one, in
fact, we won't have to
go Jan or anything like
that. And seconds, minutes later,
you can have that value.
We can have that mashed
out. So she usually hugely
valuable in that area, the
data mining. Interesting. And that's
all in I'm in dotnet
four or five, or what
do we call that F
sharp At shop, right? Three
that's included with visual studio
11. Absolutely. Yeah. Very exciting
feature. You should check out
some of the videos online.
Thomas pathtrack is talking about
it recently, Q con and
conference in London last week,
Don's then out for a
year, announced talking about it,
amazing demos, and you can
do that mash up. You
can do that data access
from F sharp and then
access that really easily from
C-sharp. So you can get
those final values and push
that into you business application.
And just to make it
clear in case it wasn't
clear to folks who've been
listening to this whole time.
These are just, it's just
all I L I can
go and add reference, and
I can pick an F
sharp library and call those
methods. And as long as
I'm using things within the
dotnet base class library that
are shared amongst all dotnet
languages, I can move data
in and out. No problem
between F sharp and C.
Absolutely. Yeah. I like that.
Well, thank you so much.
Phillip Telford and Richard migrants.
I really like all the
different links that we talked
about as well as other
ones that Richard and Philip
think are useful and we'll
put Philip think are useful,
and we'll put them in
the show notes, including the
one that I'm checking out
right now at tri F
sharp at your time. Thank
you, gentlemen. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week.